+++
title = "BCoz – a Causal profiler for JS + React"
draft = true
[taxonomies]
tags = ["javascript", "react"]
+++

A profiler that shows you where the low hanging fruit is. It finds functions (even async ones) that, if optimized, will directly affect total app performance.

Compare this with a traditional profiler which tell you which functions are spending the most cpu cycles.

Based off [Coz](https://github.com/plasma-umass/coz)

## How it works

BCoz works by creating a small experiment, e.g. if I speedup function `fnA` by 10%, will I see a difference in the performance of the app? It then tries another function, `fnB`, and speeds that up by 10% and sees if that affects the performance of the app. There's a trick though.

We can't actually speedup any arbitrary function (if we could we would never need profilers in the first place). We instead create a virtual speedup by slowing everything down, and then skipping the artificial slowdown if we are in the function we want to speed up. For the `fnA` example, It's kind of like we made the computer slower, except when we are in `fnA`.

## Setup

To setup BCoz, you need to record two things: Throughput and Latency. To track throughput we use progress markers (the `markProgress(label?: string)` function). To track latency, we mark the start and end of the transaction we care about with `markStart(txLabel: string)` and `markEnd(txLabel: string)` respectively. The labels for `markStart` and `markEnd` should be the same for the same transaction.

## Toy Example

```js
const fnA = async () => {
  // Wait 10s
  await new Promise(resolve => setTimeout(() => resolve(), 10e3));
};

const fnB = async () => {
  // Wait 17s
  await new Promise(resolve => setTimeout(() => resolve(), 17e3));
};

const MyApp = () => {
  useEffect(() => markStart("loadApp"), []);
  const [fnAFinished, setFnAFinished] = useState(false);
  const [fnBFinished, setFnBFinished] = useState(false);

  // Initial load
  useEffect(() => {
    Promise.all([
      fnA().then(() => setFnAFinished(true)),
      fnB().then(() => setFnBFinished(true))
    ]).then(() => {
      markProgress();
      markEnd("loadApp");
    });
  }, []);

  return (
    <div>
      Fns finished: A:{JSON.stringify(fnAFinished)}, B:
      {JSON.stringify(fnBFinished)}
    </div>
  );
};
```

In this example, no matter how much you optimize `fnA`, you'll have no effect on the load time of the app, but if you optimize `fnB` by 10%, you'll affect the app performance by 10%.

---

## How it's implemented:

When functions are called, they are wrapped. If the function returns a promise (It is async), then we return a promise that delays the result of the original promise. If the function is a sync function, then we do spend some cpu cycles waiting (i.e. increment a counter).
